Holistically, our project is structured with a loading page that redirects to our home page, which then allows users to easily navigate between various calming exercises and resource pages. Our project integrates the functionalities of Flask, JavaScript, HTML, Jinja, and CSS to deliver a dynamic webpage characterized by logical user flow and a calming, earthly aesthetic. We chose these specific languages and frameworks because they are very compatible together and allow the efficient integration of dynamic content into our web pages.

Our breathing page (breathing.html) utilized a combination of the languages listed above in order to create a smooth, visually pleasing guided breathing animation for the viewers to watch and follow along with. We used keyframes in CSS to transform the breathing circle from expanding and contracting. We also used Javascript to time the changes in the breathing instructions within the breathing circle, changing it from “breathe in” to “breathe out” in synchronization with the expansion and contraction of the circle. We wanted this page to be very simple, showing mainly the breathing circle so that users would not be distracted by other elements in the page. This is why we chose to have our circle be blue rather than green, centered in the middle, and have not much content other than the circle itself.

The grounding form (grounding.html) allows users to provide answers to various questions. We incorporated the “required” field within each input field to ensure that users enter an answer to each grounding question before being able to submit their answers. Upon clicking the “submit” button, the form utilizes the POST method to submit data to the server, which is then retrieved and passed to grounded.html. In grounded.html, the submitted responses are then displayed in a table format for users to read their responses. We chose to make this page more form-like so that we could collect the user’s grounding data in an organized, clear manner. It’s clear what the form intends to do, allowing the user to truly feel grounded and focus on the present when they are filling out the form, which enhances user interaction and experience.

Our journaling page (journaling.html) is centered around efficient form handling and data privacy. We use a form to send user journal entries to the server through a POST request. We chose to use the POST method as we wanted to prevent personal journal entries data from being visible in the URL, thereby safeguarding user privacy. To display the journals we created an id for each journal entry so we could CSS style them to look like sticky notes. We then created a journal board id for the main div of the page to format the sticky notes in a row, resembling sticky notes spread across a bulletin board. We wanted to fit the journal entries like this so users could see multiple entries at the same time.

The doodling page (doodling.html) utilizes the same concepts of form submission and data privacy as journaling with the addition of a canvas element, which serves as the drawing board for users. The canvas element is controlled by JavaScript, which makes it possible to handle user input and render the resulting sketches. We used event listeners attached to the canvas to capture user interactions like mouse movements and clicks. These events trigger corresponding functions in the script, which then manipulate the canvas's content. This results in a page with drawing mechanics that track and render the user's doodle in real-time. Moreover, the JavaScript code incorporates functionalities like color selection and undo actions by manipulating the canvas state. These doodles are vertically displayed, simulating flipping through the pages of a sketchbook.

A key aspect of our design for the journaling and doodling pages is the implementation of SQL databases. When users submit their journal entries and doodles via our journaling and doodling pages, our code is structured to send this information to POST request in Flask, which then inserts their journals and doodles into their respective SQL tables. To streamline the storage of information, we created DoodleEntry and JournalEntry objects to encapsulate all the information needed to display a journal entry (text) and DoodleEntry (JSON string). We chose to use SQL for storing backend information as it provided a robust way for data management and retrieval, as we could easily make query requests (deletion, ordering, insertion, etc).

To dynamically display journal and doodle entries on a new page (journal-board.html and sketches.html respectively), we used Flask to render these pages, passing the latest data as parameters. In conjunction with this, we used Jinja in the HTML framework to ensure that the content updates dynamically. We chose this approach as we wanted to make sure that every time a user adds a new journal entry or doodle, the respective pages are updated in real time, thus creating an interactive experience for the users.

The resources page features a table of hotline resources and educational resources. Within the hotlines, there are buttons to call and text, with functionality defined using JavaScript. The texting functionality will also auto-populate the message sent to the hotlines, with a unique one generated for each hotline. Each educational resource has either a “website” or “learn more” button that will open the resource in a new tab upon click. We decided to design this page with hotlines and educational resources separated for clarity, with buttons in a different color to stand out.

We also have a home button at the top of every page that redirects users to the index.html homepage. The home button is our serenity space logo, which we included for user-friendly navigation.

Our web pages also have resizing and responsive design features, allowing our pages to be viewed across a variety of devices, such as computers, phones, iPads, etc. We were able to dynamically resize the elements in our web pages by making use of the viewport meta tag, which gave us the ability to alter our elements according to the size of the device the user was viewing them on. We also made use of “vw” (viewport width) and “vh” (viewport height) when creating elements rather than simply using px (pixels) to further generate a more dynamic and visually pleasing experience for our users.

The strategic use of “div” elements played a crucial role in creating a consistent and cohesive visual structure across our web pages. This was especially beneficial in ensuring the uniformity in presentation of elements like borders and button styles, which enhances the overall user experience and contributes to the earthly, calming aesthetic.

Our code includes a centralized CSS file (styles.css) along with a centralized HTML file (layout.html). With styles.css, we ensured that each page had a similar aesthetic (ex. same text font and size). For layout.html, we included all of the navigation bar elements within it since we wanted every page (except the loading page, which is the only page that doesn’t use layout.html) to have the same menu on the top. Having centralized files helped reduce the amount of repetitive code within each web page, maintain a consistent and uniform aesthetic across pages, streamline website design, and coordinate efforts to ensure a unified design approach across all of our team members.
